# magicc: a general interpreter/compiler compiler

<!-- **NB** The README is only guaranteed to be accurate for the commit it was a part of. If there is any appreciable Δt between the last README update and the last project update, you may safely assume the README is out of date. -->

*magicc* is a system for simplified programming language development and experimentation. Those interested in using languages generated by this system can jump right to working with the command line, which should explain everything necessary to run languages. The rest of this guide is for those interested in using magicc for development and prototyping.


### Table of Contents


<!--TOC-->

- [Installation](#installation)
  - [Requirements](#requirements)
  - [Setup](#setup)
- [Overview](#overview)
  - [Getting Started](#getting-started)
  - [EBNF Syntax](#ebnf-syntax)
    - [Nonterminals](#nonterminals)
    - [Terminals](#terminals)
  - [Semantic Attributes](#semantic-attributes)
    - [Function Names](#function-names)
    - [Default Behavior](#default-behavior)
  - [Evaluation](#evaluation)
    - [Understanding `expr`](#understanding-expr)
    - [An Example](#an-example)
    - [Addenda](#addenda)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)

<!--TOC-->


## Installation


### Requirements

magicc was developed using Python 3.12. Support for earlier versions is not guaranteed.

magicc uses [PyInstaller](https://pyinstaller.org/en/stable/) for compilation. It is strongly recommended to use a Python virtual environment for managing all dependencies, which are provided in `.requirements`.

```bash
$ python3 -m venv example
$ source example/bin/activate
$ pip install -r .requirements
```


### Setup

In order to compile magicc projects, you will have to make the `magicc` file executable.

```
$ chmod +x magicc
```


## Overview


### Getting Started


The general structure of the magicc system, for the end user, begins with two files: `syntax.txt` and `semantics.py`. To start a new language project, create a directory, e.g. `banter/`. Within that directory, you can provide two separate implementations:

- `banter/interpreter/`
- `banter/compiler/`

If magicc cannot find a syntax/semantics file in an implementation-specific folder, it will look for it in the language folder. However, generally the syntax for both the interpreted and compiled version of a language will be the same, and so a typical layout would look like

```
banter/syntax.txt
banter/interpreter/semantics.py
banter/compiler/semantics.py
```

where the syntax is shared, but the semantics is implementation-specific.


### EBNF Syntax


The `syntax.txt` file is specified in standard EBNF, e.g.

```
<NUMBER> ::= <INT> | <FLOAT>
<FLOAT>  ::= \d*\.\d+
<INT>    ::= 0 | [1-9]\d*
```

This defines the structure of the AST that will be generated.

Grammar specifications are modular and can be imported. Currently, arbitrary module definition is not supported; magicc includes a `.lib/` folder with built-in modules, which can be imported using `#require` followed by the path to the module separated by `.`, e.g. from the Banter grammar,

```
#require datatypes.identifier
#require datatypes.string
#require math.infix


<PROGRAM>        ::= <STATEMENT_LIST> | <EXPRESSION>
```

Every main syntax file (i.e. not an imported module) **must** contain a `<PROGRAM>` rule as the top-level production. This serves as the consistent entrypoint for the AST.


#### Nonterminals


All nonterminals are recognized by enclosing `<>` and are not case-sensitive. 

Nonterminals must follow the C identifier naming standard (characters must be aphanumeric or _, and must start with a letter or underscore).

For indented languages, magicc provides two special nonterminals, `<INDENT>` and `<DEDENT>`. These wrap indented sections of the grammar, and automatically handle the indentation of intervening lines, e.g. from the Banter grammar,

```
<CONDITIONAL>    ::= <IF_THEN> | <IF_THEN_ELSE>
<IF_THEN>        ::= if <COMPARISON>, then <BLOCK>
<IF_THEN_ELSE>   ::= if <COMPARISON>, then <BLOCK> \n+ else <BLOCK>
<BLOCK>          ::= \n+ <INDENT> <STATEMENT_LIST> <DEDENT>
```


#### Terminals


All terminals are treated as regular expressions and are therefore case-sensitive. 

Spaces are used to divide elements of each production rule, but are not treated literally; to indicate a literal space, use a regular expression. The pipe symbol `|` by default indicates alternation in the production rules; escape to use it literally, e.g. from the Boolexpr grammar,

```
<EXPR>     ::= <AND> \| <EXPR> | <AND>
```


### Semantic Attributes


The `semantics.py` file is typically provided in either an `interpreter/` or a `compiler/` subdirectory. It can be simply provided in the language folder, in which case the default expected implementation is an interpreter.


#### Function Names


The semantics file will contain functions following the naming convention `p_<rule>[<variant>]`. Functions that do not follow this convention will still be included but will not be bound to nodes of the AST. 


#### Default Behavior


If no variant is provided, the bound semantic function ("attribute") will be used when evaluating all alternatives in the production or as a fallback for variants where no attribute is specified.

If no attribute is specified for the variant and no general fallback is given, the default behavior will depend on the implementation:

- For interpreted languages, it evaluates and returns the first item in the pattern.
- For compiled languages, it compiles each item in the pattern and returns them all as one string, joined by spaces.

For example, in Banter, for the following grammar excerpt,

```
<PRINT>          ::= print <EXPRESSION> | print
```

our attributes, following the naming convention, are

```py
def p_print_0(expr):
    print(expr(1))

def p_print_1(expr):
    print()
```

Note that for `p_print_0`, we could simply write `p_print`, and it would be used as the fallback when no attribute for alternative 0 was found.

Another example, from the `datatypes.numeric` module,

```
<NUMBER> ::= <INT> | <FLOAT>
<FLOAT>  ::= \d*\.\d+
<INT>    ::= 0 | [1-9]\d*
```

`<NUMBER>` does not need an attribute, since the default behavior will evaluate and return the first element of each alternative of the production, which is sufficient.


### Evaluation


magicc collects all the attribute functions specified in the main and dependency `semantics.py` files, and connects them all through a hidden evaluation function. This function is internal and is never accessed directly, and should **not** be used in the `semantics.py` file. 

Every attribute must take at least one argument, `expr`. This object represents a node of the AST and its children, and forms the core abstraction which makes elegant language evaluation with magicc possible.


#### Understanding `expr`


`expr` is always either an instance of the `Expr` class, or a `str` (that is, a terminal, which can be handled normally).

Each `Expr` instance is a callable, immutable sequence. This allows it hide the evaluation function under a simple syntax like `expr(0)`, while enabling direct node access via indexing, e.g. `expr[0]`.

In more detail, the `Expr` class contains two attributes: the node it was created from, and that node's children. Iteration, indexing, and slicing all apply to the children of the node; thus `expr[1:]` returns a tuple containing all child nodes of `expr` at indices 1 or higher, and `expr[0]` returns the child node at index 0, as expected.

Evaluation provides more interesting functionality. Calling `expr(i)` evaluates the child node of `expr` at index `i` using the hidden evaluation function. In contrast to slicing, calls must take an `int` index as the first argument; any further arguments will be passed through to the bound semantic function of `expr[i]`. `expr` can also be called with `None` as the explicit first argument, or with no arguments; this will evaluate the node itself (and its children as determined by its attribute function).

The `__getitem__` method of `Expr` will always return either a `tuple[Expr]` (as in slicing), or an `Expr` (indexing, iteration, &c.). In other words, `Expr` is the interface between the bare AST and the higher level language implementation The intended way to evaluate nodes function is by calling `expr`, and the intended way to access the unevaluated nodes (as their own instances of `Expr`, of course) is by indexing or iterating over `expr`.

> *The fundamental design principle is: to directly traverse the AST, treat `expr` as a sequence; to recursively evaluate the tree, call it like a function.*


#### An Example


Let us take as an example the attribute `p_print_0(expr)` from Banter, bound to the first alternative of the `<PRINT>` rule. 

When `p_print_0(expr)` is called, `expr` will be an `Expr` object bundling
1) the `PRINT` node,
2) the unevaluated child nodes of `<PRINT>` in the AST as an immutable sequence, and
3) a function to evaluate either the node itself or specific children.

When we call `expr(1)` in `p_print_0(expr)`, the `Expr` object interprets this as: "Evaluate the child of `expr` at index 0 and return that value." The expression `expr[1]`, on the other hand, corresponds to: "Look up the child of the `<PRINT>` node at index 1, and return it either as a string (if it's a terminal) or as a new `Expr` (if it's a node)".

This system of access and evaluation makes writing general traversals of the AST quite simple:

```py
def preorder(node) -> list:
    traversal = [node]
    if not isinstance(node, str):
        for child in node: 
            traversal += preorder(child)
    return traversal
```


#### Addenda


`Expr` implements `__str__` and `__repr__`, both of which are deferred to the implementations provided by the node itself, allowing the developer to easily view the object structure or check for specific node types, e.g. `print(expr[0].__repr__())`, `str(expr) == "MARKER"`, &c.

For a more thorough understanding of how this system works, peruse the `EVAL` section of a generated `AST.py` file and compare it to what you see in the semantic functions.


## Contributing


If you have ideas for interesting features, find or fix a bug, or notice a typo, please feel free to contribute via a pull request.


## License

magicc is licensed under a [GNU General Public License](https://github.com/Antonio-Iijima/CFG-Parser/blob/main/LICENSE).
